In this video we'll learn how we can call C++ functions using default argument values.
As we've seen when we call a function we must provide all the arguments that that function requires
and the must be in the right order and of the right type.
But sometimes when we call functions some of the argument values that we pass in tend to be the same
values most of the time.
For example if we have a function that calculates the cost of an item we can provide the function with
the base cost of the item and the sales tax rate.
Suppose that 98 percent of our customers live in a region where the tax rate is 6 percent that means
that we have to provide the tax rate and every function call even though it will almost always be 6
percent.
C++ allows us to provide default values for arguments.
So in the case of the sales tax if we omit the argument from the function call then the C++ compiler
will automatically replace it with the default value of 6 percent.
However if we have a customer whose sales tax rate is 8 percent then we can provide it explicitly and
override the default value as we'll see in the next few slides.
We cannot default arguments to the function prototype or the function definition but not both.
But best practice is to do it in the function prototype default arguments must appear at the tail end
of the parameter list.
We can also have multiple default arguments.
Let's see an example that demonstrates the false arguments
in this example.
We have a function with no default arguments.
And the next slide will modify.
So it does have a default argument.
The function is called calculate cost and it expects the base cost of an item and the tax rate the function
calculates the tax amount and adds that to the base costs and returns that value to the caller in the
main function we're calling the function with one hundred point zero as the base cost and 0.06 or 6
percent as the tax rate in this case one hundred six point zero was returned from the function and assigned
to cost.
That's pretty easy.
But if 98 percent of our customers will have a 6 percent tax rate I'm forced to supply this.
Every time I call the function.
Why not let the compiler default the tax rate to 6 percent unless I tell it otherwise.
Let's do that in the next slide.
Here we have the same function except that the function prototype has been modified to provide a default
value for the tax rate.
Notice that the parameter tax rate in the function prototype now has a default initialization to 0.06
added to it.
This effectively tells the compiler that if this argument is not provided by the function call then
use the value 0.06 for tax rate.
Simple as that.
Now notice the two calls in the main function.
The first call simply calls Kelt cost with two hundred point zero which is the base cost.
Since the argument for tax rate is not provided the compiler will use 6 percent for the tax rate in
the second call we are providing the tax rate in this case the compiler we use that and ignore the default
value.
This can be pretty handy.
Suppose we have a function that prints documents and we have to supply the document name the printer
to print to the paper size the resolution and so forth.
Again most of the time we print to the default printer with default settings but sometimes we need higher
resolution or a different printer.
You get the idea.
In this case we can provide multiple default parameters for everything except the document name which
is always required.
This makes writing the code much simpler.
Let's add another default parameter to the cut costs function.
In this example we'll calculate the cost of an item based on the base cost of the item the sales tax
and the shipping charge as before most of the times the sales tax will be 6 percent.
And in this example the standard typical shipping charge is three dollars and fifty cents.
So most customers will have a 6 percent tax rate and $3 and 50 Cent shipping charge.
We can easily add a second default argument to this function.
Notice that in the function prototype we add on another parameter named shipping and we default this
value through three dollars and fifty cents the function body now calculates the tax for the item and
the shipping charge adds this to the original cost of the item and returns the result to the caller
in the main function.
We're calling it cost in three different ways in the first call we're providing all three arguments
to the function.
In this case no default values will be used and the tax rate will be 8 percent and shipping will be
$4 and 25 cents in the second call we're providing the cost of the item and the tax rate of 8 percent.
In this case the default value for shipping will be used but the tax rate will use the 8 percent we
provided in the final example.
We're only providing the cost of the item.
So in this case both default values are used the tax rate will default to 6 percent and the shipping
charge to three dollars and fifty cents.
As you can see default argument values give us the ability to make our code less verbose and potentially
prevent errors by using default values rather than having to supply all of the arguments to the function
all the time in the next video.
We'll learn about function overloading before we talk about function overloading in the next video.
Let me go over default arguments.
I mean the sectional eBid workspace and the default arguments project and this is the same example you
saw in the slides.
Here I've got a function called calculate cost that expects three doubles the base cost a tax rate which
is a default argument at 0.06 or 6 percent and a default shipping which is three dollars and fifty cents.
Now if those arguments are not supplied then the defaults kick in.
It's really pretty simple.
And here's the calculation notice I don't have to include the function default arguments here in the
function definition only in the function prototype and that's usually where you see them.
So the code here says base cost plus equals base cost times the tax rate so I'm figuring out what's
my tax and I'm adding the shipping to that.
And then I'm adding the whole thing to base cost so I'm not taxing the shipping.
And then we've got some sample calls and this first example I'm calling calculate costs with all three
arguments.
So in this case none of the defaults will be used.
I'll use a 100 for the base cost I'll use 8 percent for the tax rate and I'll use $4 and 25 cents for
the shipping charge.
I expect to get back 112 and 25 for this example here I'm providing the first two arguments and I'm
not providing the shipping.
So in this case it's going to use 100 as the base cost 8 percent for the tax rate and it will default
to 350 here for the shipping.
And the last example I'm supplying the base costs only.
So in this case 6 percent and $3 and 50 cents or we're going to be asked.
So if I run this program you'll see that our results are exactly as we expected.
1:12 25:1 11 15 to 15 50.
So you can see default arguments are pretty easy to use.
I could also default the base costs if I wanted to I could say that the base cost is 100 maybe that's
the typical item that most people order.
So in this case I could just simply just say cost is a cost right.
With nothing in the parentheses.
So I'm not supplying any arguments here.
That's it.
So what's going to happen here it's it's going to use all three default arguments so let me put that
out real quick.
So in this case we expect the same result as well if we would have done one hundred six so we'd have
100 is the base cost it's being used by default.
We're using a 6 percent tax rate so that's another six dollars and our shipping would be 350.
So in this case we expect to 100 950.
So let's give that a shot.
And that's what we're getting here 100 950.
This is pretty straightforward.
The only rule with the default arguments is that once you create a parameter that has a default value
then you've got it default the rest of them.
So in other words I can't say that base cost is 100.
And then not have one here because that's going to give me an error.
Right.
Once you start they all have to be on the tail end.
So in this case I could just say 0.06.
So that's really the only rule there and I'll run that again just to make sure I've got no errors.
And there you go.
So let's add another default type Funk's to this application.
How about a greeting function.
So let's do something like this it's create a function prototype here for for a function called greeting
that expects a string which has someone's name.
Now let me include strange because I need the library.
So that's a string name perfect that be frank Metropolis Joe Miller whatever you want then I've got
another string which is the prefix that we want in front of their name.
MR.
Dr MSS whatever you like and I'm going to prefix it to Mr..
Let's say that most of my customers are male and I also want a suffix.
In this case the suffix I'm going to default at just the empty string.
OK.
So that's my function prototype.
Let's implement this function now.
Well implement it right down here.
And at this point we don't need those default arguments we just get rid of them from here.
And it cleans up the code a little bit.
All right.
So what do we want to do here.
We just really want to display some stuff right.
So let's just say I want an output statement and I'm going to say hello followed by a space followed
by the prefix.
And what we could do here is we could append a space that we can use concatenation here and the name
and another space and the suffix.
So we're just using concatenation here just like we've learned in string class
and then we'll use the end line to finish it off.
OK so let's run that to give it a few example it runs here so let's say how about let's do a really
simple one How about greeting.
And I'm going to split all of these arguments are going to say Glynne-Jones is the name the prefix will
be doctor and the suffix will be empty.
OK.
So if we run that we expect this to display.
Dr. Glenn Jones M.D. And so let's give it a shot.
And forgot the semi-colon off except for a quick and there you go.
Hello Dr. Glenn Jones M.D..
Perfect.
Now let's run some of the other examples.
So how about we do something like greeting James Rogers.
How about Professor and Ph.D. for the suffix
OK and we'll run that and I will say Hello Professor James Rogers Ph.D. pretty easy.
Now let's use some defaults in this case we'll say greeting let's say Frank Miller
and Dr. no suffix in this case sort of default to the blank or the empty space or in this case it'll
just say Dr Frank Miller which is what I want and then let's do one more and we'll just say greeting
let's say William Smith.
So in this case it's going to use all the default values.
So it's going to use Mr. William Smith followed by the empty string right there for the suffix.
So in this case we're just going to see Mr. William Smith.
There you go.
If we have
Mary Howard and she would be Mrs.
and give her a title as well whatever we like
to go.
So now we've got Mrs. Mary Howard Ph.D. instead of Doctor we could have a doctor here as well you can
see all the different combinations this can come in pretty handy.
I used to work with someone who used to say that if something is always required then it should never
be required which makes a lot of sense and I think that's part of the idea behind using default arguments
and using overloading which we'll talk about next.